"COVID-19 and Emergency Preparedness through Deep Learning and Smart Catalogs"
==============================================================================

Ushizima, Higa, Sadre, Pelt, Crane, Tosun, Lee, Garcia, Liem, Sundaram, Manjumdar, DOE Data Day 2020

The high transmission rate of COVID-19 is due in part to its long incubation times, during which infected individuals are contagious and often times asymptomatic. COVID-19 tests are needed worldwide but restricted to a few places due to the scarcity of equipment and/or reagents to analyze viruses-related proteins. The search for alternative technologies that allow at least screening and ranking are of utmost importance to scale healthcare to worldwide populations. Several technologies within the DOE mission space, for example, deep learning in image analysis, are likely to provide mechanisms for situations that require rapid emergency preparedness.

This project focuses on deploying deep learning algorithms for exploring X-ray imaging from databases with information about COVID-19 infection. The proposed work consists of three main tasks: (1) Advanced analysis for lung scans acquired by computed tomography (CT) and chest X-rays (CXR) from large populations using public and private datasets (2) New algorithms for SARS-CoV-2 structural and organizational characterization through soft X-ray tomography (SXT), particularly the 3D imaging and better understanding of the viral replication factory; (3) Integration: from individual exams to epidemiological insights, including “smart catalogs” for gathering, curating and correlating extracted information from multimodal imaging.

Recent results evaluated on public image databases with information from lung scans, such as CT and CXR, used convolutional neural networks, e.g., U-nets and mixed scaled dense networks, including other techniques in machine learning in order to create a COVID-19 score. Current data-driven models for prediction are also exploring computation at NERSC HPC infrastructure. The resulting computational tools are likely to provide alternative methods to screen, stage and rank cases of COVID-19.

To improve accessibility and interpretability of the results, a "smart catalog" is under development, which makes use of new capabilities at NERSC, such as the Spin platform, which supports the deployment of services that are connected to computing projects at NERSC. Spin provides cloud-style flexibility while allowing users to create new apps on demand that have direct access to HPC file systems and networks. Spin is based on the Rancher orchestration system, using Docker and Kubernetes. The smart catalog will provide a RESTful API to computing results. To implement this smart catalog, the first component is a customized Docker container that houses a PostgreSQL database server and makes use of persistent storage allocated through the Spin system. The second component is a customized Docker container that houses an Apache 2 web server hosting a website that uses the Django web framework and Django REST Framework, providing communication with the first container, which serves as a database backend.

The next steps will include data that has just been released by UCSF, which will allow an improved understanding of COVID-19 radiological signatures and their integration to metadata and clinical data for screening and ranking patients with suspected COVID-19. Additionally, SXT of COVID-19 infected cells are soon to be available and will require sophisticated algorithms for three-dimensional structural characterization.
